Campus in the Time of COVID-19Welcome to "Campus in the Time of COVID-19," a digital project that seeks to understand the unfolding of new landscapes in the university setting, both in the virtual realm and on physical campuses. As many universities navigate unfamiliar terrain, they reach into an impressive arsenal of digital and analogue tactics to prepare students and spaces for learning during a global pandemic. DH 1: A Deviant Digital ProjectInformation on the digital platform adjusts expectations and defines behaviors in the weeks leading up to the return to campus. An emphasis on individual behavior shifts liability from the university to individuals.DH 2: The Digital TerrainStriking the balance between metadata and narrative proves precarious in the digital realm of a university's response to COVID-19.DH 3: The Geography of a PandemicA tour of a university campus on the verge of welcoming students back in the midst of a global pandemic.DH 4: The Metropolitan Virus-ScapeAnalyzing downtown Evanston’s Coronavirus landscape with a focus on sensory experience offers a chance for critical engagement with the city’s pandemic policies.DH 5: Technology and Humanistic ScholarshipTensions between storytelling and technology steer evaluations of three distinct digital projects.DH 6: Mapping the COVID-ScapeWhat is data without context? What is an archive without a narrative? Preview tools used to contextualize a collection of images in order to enhance their meaning and craft a narrative about the impact of COVID-19.DH 7: Old Settlers, New Colonialisms, and the Digital ProjectIn order to approach this digital project critically and with attention to the ontologies and epistemologies embedded within it, and knowing its material foundations are rooted and intertwined with Northwestern’s oppressive and extractive interactions with the Indigenous people, this report explores the question: whose histories made this project possible?DH 8: A Praxis of Digital ActivismHow do digital humanities and activism interact? Movements such as #BlackLivesMatter exemplify what Kim Gallon’s “technology of recovery,” by striving to resist racial hegemonies and “bring forth the full humanity of marginalized peoples" through the use of digital tools and counter-narratives.Project History and Process NarrativeUsing Roopika Risam’s methodology framework for social justice oriented digital projects, this report explores how this project's process and history results in a site that is much more than a sum of its assigned parts: it is an archive that seeks to capture a moment in time and critically investigate its relationship to the past and present through the use of digital platforms and tools.BONUS: Star Wars PandemicCheck out this just-for-fun game meant to transpose our pandemic-ridden world onto a different universe! Click to play.Translating the world of a pandemic into a Star Wars game is no simple task. It requires both creativity and technical finesse. I made the background a starship, because it seemed like an apt comparison to how life during the pandemic has felt enclosed, quarantined, and isolated. We might as well have been in our own starships on our own planets... The droid moves at a slow speed, replicating the sense of dread that knowing symptoms may take up to two weeks to manifest, despite the rapidity at which the virus spreads, which is reflected by the appearance of Probots (they move fast). Probots materialize whenever R2-D2 hits an obstacle, mirroring the importance of touch in spreading COVID-19 accompanied by a disconcerting alert, reproducing the anxiety of living in a world where you must be cognizant and war of everything you touch.In addition to worrying about the technical aspects, I also found myself questioning the ethics of the “game” and what kind of stakes are involved with fashioning a game after a global pandemic. I am concerned with what one might call the affective experience of “games” rather than whether games should be considered rigorous scholarship. Do games need to be "fun"?Digital Humanities challenges the “very core of what we have come to know as the humanities by recovering alternate constructions of humanity that have been historically excluded from that concept.” - Kim GallonI'd love to hear from you! Please click here to take a brief user experience survey!

Access underlying site files here.

A special thanks for the hardwork of those who made this project possible: Professor Adrian Wisnicki, Jessica Dussault, Professor Liz Lorang, Bryan Christman, Ella Durham, and Matt Simon.Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0

Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “Home,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.