The Metropolitan Virus-ScapeAnalyzing downtown Evanston’s Coronavirus landscape with a focus on sensory experience offers a chance for critical engagement with the city’s pandemic policies. This piece examines downtown Evanston through a sensory lens while invoking theories of enriched interpretive experiences to translate the observations to a digital platform. Knowing that these reflections will contribute to a documentary digital project pushed me to observe beyond just optics: what did it feel like? In short, this reflection aims to create an immersive and interpretive archive of Evanston in a pandemic. [1]Before my foray into downtown Evanston, I tried to 1) determine which “phase” of re-opening the city was in, and 2) what that meant practically. But, I had difficulty locating this information. After trolling the City of Evanston website and the State of Illinois’ Coronavirus Response site, I ended up Googling “what phase is Illinois in?” Phase 4, it turns out. But this highlights an interesting point. I gleaned more data about how I was supposed to behave publicly, when masks were required, and what was open, by walking around downtown Evanston than I did from browsing the websites responsible for providing this “critical” information. Northwestern’s deviant digital humanities project[2] proves more efficacious in communicating information and enforcing rules than did all of Evanston’s “Coronavirus” subpages (including useless pages titled “Evanstrong” and “ReCOVER Evanston”). So what is Phase 4? Revitalization. Gatherings of 50 or fewer allowed, bars, restaurants, and retail open with safety measures and capacity guidance.[3] Meanwhile, nationally, coronavirus deaths creep toward a quarter of a million.[4]In my car at 2 pm on Tuesday I waited, sweating, for my phone to download Evanston’s Parking App. Despite a global pandemic, economic devastation, and more empty parking spots than cars surrounding my little Subaru, I still needed to pay to park in downtown Evanston. $2 an hour. I didn’t want to touch the buttons on the machine. But I had opera playing in the car, so it wasn’t all bad.Downtown Evanston was quiet. Not eerily quiet, but that lull usually found early in the morning. Quiet enough that cicadas could be heard over passing cars, muffled conversations behind masks, the gentle wind, and an occasional stereo system bumping past.Small stores were having big sales. 50%-off sales. Their goods lined the sidewalk, forcing you to inadvertently shop as you walked down the street. But a lot of businesses wouldn’t take cash, and all required a facemask to enter. I stopped by one of my go-to coffee shops. It was my first time there since leaving Evanston nearly seven months ago. Entering, I was struck by memories of sitting in the then-crowded space with my friends. You had to watch your elbows lest you bump your neighbor; that’s how packed it was. But on this Tuesday, the room appeared much bigger and was certainly emptier. I felt equal parts nostalgic and fearful, watching fifteen customers drinking and chatting at tables inside with no masks.What was I not greeted by? The smell of fresh coffee. Because all I could smell was my own breath trapped inside my three-layer Mom-made cat mask. Even though I wear mine as if my life and others’ depend on it, not everyone does. Especially not outside. In fact, most people outside were not wearing masks, even when sitting and chatting in the fenced-in area outside the coffee shop. Nearly thirty maskless people sat close to one another in the coffee shop’s designated pen. I wonder what they smell.[1]Stan Ruecker and Jennifer Roberts-Smith, “Experience Design for the Humanities: Activating Multiple Interpretations,” in Making Things and Drawing Boundaries: Experiments in the Digital Humanities, Jentery Sayers, ed. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017). [2] See Hope McCaffrey, “A Deviant Digital Project.”[3] State of Illinois Coronavirus (COVID-19) Response. [4] “US coronavirus cases and state maps,” Washington Post, accessed September 24, 2020.

Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “The Metropolitan Virus-Scape,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.