Technology and Humanistic ScholarshipTensions between storytelling and technology steer my evaluations of three distinct digital projects (two in the realm of technology and one relating to the digits on our hands). The more training and knowledge a digital platform required, I found, the less I was able to invest in the storytelling aspect of the project. That being said, my drawing revealed that an absence of technology creates an entirely new set of questions to grapple with, relating entirely to narrative and humanistic expression. Where is the balance? Keeping in mind Segel and Heer’s principle that data should exist to enrich stories, while using these tools I struggled to reconcile what Graham terms “the young age of data analysis with the rich texture of research that humanities scholarship emphasizes.”The user-friendly StoryMap JS made me want to compensate for the minimalism of its interface with creativity and complexity in narrative and storytelling. This impulse may also have been a result of not doing the labor on the back end to create the platform. Conversely, I found myself so wrapped up in the challenge of coding in Geo JSON and GitHub, that I barely gave a second thought to narrative, let alone a critical one, and still wound up with a very basic digital product. But this comparison makes me wonder if the amount of labor that goes into the digital making has an impact on the amount of storytelling that occurs. Can we be both digital maker and humanistic scholar? And yet, if we aren’t familiar with the intricacies of the digital, how do we “make against the grain,” so to speak?As I drew a rather uncritical analogue depiction of my Geo JSON data without the context of the map, questions about design, art, and scholarship were foremost on my mind. When making with your hands, the narrative possibilities felt limitless. Because you are uninhibited by expressing in a digital language, humanistic concerns assumed primacy. I believe art is a persuasive and unparalleled form of scholarship (i.e. artists such as Kara Walker), but what is compelling about the digital humanities as a field is that it grapples with humanistic studies in our new digital age. Is analogue drawing the way to do this? It would be ironic, but I don’t think making with hands is off the table.When working with the JSON code and GitHub, I kept returning to Segel and Heer’s conviction that data should be just part of the story. In the digital humanities, humans should be the “main stuff,” and the data should enrich those stories. I was quite far from humanistic concerns as I paused Jessica Dussault’s video every minute to make sure I wasn’t doing something wrong. And the result? A basic “website” that looks incomplete (a testament to my own shortcomings and no one else’s). The bottom line is, until one becomes proficient or even fluent with technologies such as coding, humanistic concerns by default take a back seat. And this presents a real challenge; but is it worth it? I think so, because with StoryMap JS, I found myself falling back on old methodologies for storytelling: words. Taking their inflexible mold and forcing your narrative on it leaves little room for creativity, except when it comes to the images and text you choose to add. Thus, I fell back on a language I knew I could tell stories in: writing. So, if a person invests in learning the language of computers and websites, it is probably worth the time because they will be able to tell human-centered stories using new methodologies.

Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “Technology and Humanistic Scholarship,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.