Mapping the COVID-ScapeWhat is data without context? What is an archive without a narrative? The tools used below aim to contextualize a collection of images in order to enhance their meaning and craft a narrative about the impact of COVID-19, and, just as importantly, a certain city's response. The first tool utilizes familiar instruments always readily available to humanistic scholars: words and images. The second tool however, approaches a collection of images through the backend, building narrative through code and geographical association.Check out the StoryMap of a stroll through downtown Evanston’s reimagined landscape here.The images curated through StoryMap JS (which can be accessed by clicking the link above) seeks to guide the user on a predetermined path through a town. This particular tool allows the maker to shape narrative through text and images, given a platform with limited options. It is up to me, the maker, to recreate an experience or story in whatever way I choose for you, the user. In this way, a StoryMap controls how the user progresses through a curated set of images and associated narrative. There is limited opportunity for interaction, and the user is forced to proceed along a linear path form which they cannot move any direction instead of forward or backward – in order. Using this particular tool, I have designed a map that tells the story of a walk-through downtown Evanston and have decided what the user will see, when they will see it, and in what order. The narrative is created through descriptive text accompanying pictures that help inform your journey.Check out the GeoJSON map of Evanston’s pandemic landscape here.Alternatively, while more work for the maker on the backend, GeoJSON provides an open-ended experience for the user. By simply superimposing my route, images, and metadata onto a map, I have created an interactive experience where the user chooses what to see or not see, what order to move in, and whether she cares at all about finishing the ten-stop tour. Yet this higher degree of interactivity comes at a cost to the maker, who needs more knowledge of coding and backend building for this platform, and who also has to surrender control of narrative over to the user. In giving up control of how the images and data are interpreted, particular humanistic concerns that are often deemed central to a digital humanist can get lost in the code (or at least they seem to). But, who says that the maker is the only person who can produce knowledge in the digital humanities? Perhaps the advantage of GeoJSON and its interactivity is that it produces new sites for the creation of knowledge, even if only in subtle ways.Otherwise, enjoy a gallery of context-less images below. You control the narrative!

Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0

Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “Mapping the COVID-Scape,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.