A Praxis of Digital ActivismDuring the pandemic, the government's failure to provide support, guidance, or mitigation in any meaningful capacity throughout the summer of 2020 aggravated already raw wounds borne most significantly by Black communities and other communities of color in the United States. Disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, and relentlessly harmed and killed by police violence, Black movements rose to new heights over the summer. No analysis of a pandemic-ridden American community is accurate without an understanding that despite a highly contagious respiratory virus, American police continued to brutalize Black people and protestors. At the intersection of pandemic and anti-Black police violence, we see the importance of the digital platform to organize, mobilize, archive, preserve, and generate counter-narratives for the largest mass movement for social justice in the United States.

In 2013, a six-person jury in Florida acquitted George Zimmerman of all charges related to the murder of Trayvon Martin. From the ensuing outrage was born the #BlackLivesMatter “political will and movement,” organized by three Black activists: Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tometi (Black Lives Matter, n.d.). The movement is a pronouncement of humanity and a testament to the “resilience” of Black people “in the face of deadly oppression” (Black Lives Matter, n.d.). It is grassroots driven and oriented, it is many communities organizing and showing up, and it is digital. Through the use of a hashtag on Twitter, #BlackLivesMatter is exemplary of Kim Gallon’s “technology of recovery,” for it strives to resist racial hegemonies and “bring forth the full humanity of marginalized peoples through the use of digital platforms” (Gallon 2016).After the murder of Mike Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, on August 9, 2014, activists organized #BlackLivesMatter chapters in eighteen cities (Black Lives Matter, n.d.).  Five days later, on August 14, the shout “Black Lives Matter!” reached the city of Chicago. “We’re standing here with our hands up… and we’re still dying,” said one organizer that day (Crepeau 2014). The Black Lives Matter movement, and everyone who took to the streets throughout the country saying Mike Brown’s name, knew that what happened in Ferguson was “not an aberration, but in fact, a clear point of reference for what was happening to Black communities everywhere” (Black Lives Matter, n.d.).Chicago itself has a long and egregious history of police violence and the disproportionate targeting, use of force against, and killing of Black people. This history is exemplified by Jon Burge, a white CPD detective and commander who tortured upwards of 120 mostly African American men over the course of twenty years, beginning in the early 1970s (Chicago Torture Justice Center, n.d.). Moreover, between the years 1996 and 2017, Chicago police shot more than 1,600 individuals, more than 90% of whom were Black men or boys (Black Lives Matter Chicago, n.d.).The COVID-19 pandemic, paired with the government’s ineffectual response, exacerbated and made (more) visible deeply historic inequities in the United States. Yet the police violence continued. As hundreds of thousands of Americans died of COVID-19, police violence and the killing of predominantly Black people nation-wide persisted. George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Tony McDade, Latrell Allen (in Chicago), and Jacob Blake were just a few of the names heard at protests in the summer of 2020. Unrelenting police violence, aggravated by a rampant life-threatening pandemic, led to one of the largest uprisings and social movements in American history. After police assaulted protestors in Chicago’s Grant Park on July 17, 2020, Black Lives Matter Chicago and their allies released a report in which they stated the importance of their own digital archiving. The organizers recognized in this moment that the digital is a “mutual host for racism and resistance” (Gallon 2016). If their narrative was to be preserved, “We have to be our own media,” they found (Democratic Socialists of America et al. 2020, 11).In Evanston and on the Northwestern (NU) campus, the movement for Black lives and for police abolition continues. The NU community is currently embroiled in a struggle surrounding the NU Community Not Cops (NUCNC) organization. The student-led group demands that the university divest from its police and invest in Black students (@NUCommunityNotCops 2020). They are taking action every day until they accomplish this goal. NU president Morton Schapiro sent an email to the NU community condemning the protests with every dog whistle in his book: “outside agitators” narratives, a claim that the term “pig” is anti-Semitic, and victimizing himself and the families of Evanston (Morton Schapiro, email to author, October 19, 2020). The email (and subsequent article published in the Wall Street Journal) provoked a loud response, not just from the NUCNC and their supporters, but from across the University, all condemning President Schapiro’s anti-Black and tone-deaf email. Some have started calling for his resignation. The NU newspaper, the Daily Northwestern, started a digital archive of its own to cover the NUCNC protest and the various responses and letters from university departments and communities.But the Black Lives Matter movement is just as much about resilience, hope, and love as it is about oppression, violence, and hate. “We could not possibly catalogue all of the violence CPD has inflicted upon our friends, comrades, and loved ones,” reads the Grant Park report, “any more than we could quantify the endless love, solidarity, and resistance Chicagoans have shown in response” (Democratic Socialists of America et al. 2020, 5). And its mobilization on the digital platform, its praxis of “technology of recovery,” has become just as important to the movement as those who take to the streets.BibliographyChicago Torture Justice Center. n.d. “History of Chicago’s Reparations Movement.” Accessed October 29, 2020. https://www.chicagotorturejustice.org/historyCrepeau, Megan. 2014. “Vigil Marks Teen’s Death.” Chicago Tribune, August 15, 2014.Gallon, Kim. 2016. “Making a case for the Black Digital Humanities.” In Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Black Lives Matter. n.d. “Herstory.” Accessed October 28, 2020. https://blacklivesmatter.com/herstory/.Black Lives Matter Chicago. “Justice for Families.” Accessed October 28, 2020. https://www.blacklivesmatterchicago.com/justice-for-families/.Democratic Socialists of America Chicago, Organized Communities Against Deportations, Chi-Nations, Black Lives Matter Chicago. 2020. “Lessons from Grant Park: Research Brief on Black and Indigenous Solidarity Rally. Chicago, Illinois.” August, 2020. https://www.blacklivesmatterchicago.com/lessons-from-grant-park-report/.“Notable & Quotable: Northwestern’s President Condemns Student Protesters.” 2020. Wall Street Journal, October 22, 2020.@NUCommunityNotCops. Accessed October 29, 2020. https://linktr.ee/NUCommunityNotCops.“‘Stand Up, Fight Back’: Tracking The Daily's coverage of student protests and community response.” 2020. The Daily Northwestern. Accessed October 29, 2020. http://apps.dailynorthwestern.com/nucnctimeline/.Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0

Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “A Praxis of Digital Activism,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.