Project History and Process NarrativeUsing Roopika Risam’s methodology framework for social justice oriented digital projects, at the most fundamental level this project only existed, and only existed digitally, to fulfill the requirements for a digital humanities course (Risam n.d.). To this end, each part had trifold purpose: first, provide hands-on digital “making” experience to the student, offer an introduction to current literature and debates in the field, and third, encourage critical engagement with both aspects. The resulting project in its completeness stands for much more than a sum of its assigned parts: “Campus in the Time of COVID-19” is itself an archive that seeks to capture a moment in time and critically investigate its relationship to the past and present through the use of digital platforms and tools.Risam asks digital humanists to make evident the “iterative process of design” and examine how this interacts with the process of ‘making’ (Risam n.d.). This project is not an individual undertaking but includes the input and help of many people across various disciplines. Moreover, the version you see today is not the same as the first Homepage that had just one report, and the version you may see in a year may yet be an expanded or contracted form of the site today. And importantly, this project is the result of several different forms of institutional access and privilege. Some software used on this website required institutional access, such as ESRI Story Map, but most is free and did not require such affiliations (Wordpress, StoryMap JS, Github, Flickr, Voyant). The greatest way this project benefits from institutional affiliation though, is the support available (access to professionals and experts) and the research resources university libraries afford. The great irony of the project is that in order to write reports that tell the history of how a university contributed to settler colonialism, we must use the resources accessible only through the university’s paid subscriptions and library system. DH 8 seeks to subvert these norms by using bibliography as a radical tool to break reliance on paywalled narratives.Risam encourages collaboration, especially among communities “represented in or affected by” a project’s topic (Risam n.d.). As previously mentioned, this project was a collaborative effort with traces of instructors, professors, librarians, students, and peers. But lacking from the site is engagement with the greater community outside the walls of the university. If we can understand the site to be an iterative one though, the next step would be to treat communities not as subjects to be studied but as collaborators and makers of knowledge. While this project is about COVID-19 in a certain community and place, it fails to engage with that community on a wider scale.In other words, this project was a critically informed process of trial and error that took many people to create.BibliographyRisam, Roopika, et al. “Method.” Social Justice and the Digital Humanities. n.d. Accessed November 23, 2020. http://criticaldh.roopikarisam.com/criticaldh/method/

Copyright Hope McCaffrey, CC BY 4.0

Cite as: Hope McCaffrey, “Project History and Process Narrative,” Campus in the Time of COVID-19. Date Accessed. URL.